Raising engagement in e-learning through gamification
Cristina Ioana Muntean
Cybernetics and Statistics, Babes-Bolyai University, Romania
Strada Mihail Kogălniceanu, Nr. 1, Cluj-Napoca, Romania
E-mail: cristina.muntean@econ.ubbcluj.ro
Abstract
Games are part of day to day life, entertaining users, but at the same time modelling
behaviors. By applying game mechanics and dynamics to tasks and e-learning processes we
can increase user engagement with an e-learning application and its specific tasks. While
having multiple uses in commercial practices, gamification implies well established
techniques similar to those found in games. We will take a closer look at the ones that are
appropriate to the learning process and moreover to e-learning and analyze relevant
examples.
Keywords: gamification, e-learning
1. Introduction
The idea of using games for learning is not new. This is customary especially in the case of direct
interaction between teacher and student. Transposing this into a digital form of teaching and
learning might become an issue. Our proposed solution when confronted with this problem is
attempting to gamify the e-learning process.
Gamification (Deterding et al, 2011) is the use of game-play mechanics for non-game
applications. Any application, task, process or context can theoretically be gamified.
Gamification’s main goal is to rise the engagement of users by using game-like techniques such as
scoreboards and personalized fast feedback (Flatla et al, 2011) making people feel more ownership
and purpose when engaging with tasks (Pavlus, 2010).
Gamification is used in several different contexts mostly business and marketing, but we
further wish to demonstrate its utility and importance in the educational environment as well. By
incorporating game elements into work activities we wish to raise motivation (Shneiderman, 2004)
but, in order to do so, we need to pay attention to the integration of tasks and exercises within the
game design (Von Ahn and Dabbish, 2008).
Creating gamers for learning employ costly resources. A simpler yet still efficient approach is
to use gamification in order to make the content more attractive and engage users.
By using gamification in e-learning we wish to trigger a more efficient and engaging learning
behavior. B.J. Fogg argues that people respond to computers as they were persons, especially
when gaming (Fogg, 2002). In order to change or trigger a certain behavior students need to be
motivated and at the same time have the ability to solve the challenges.
Gamification also implies a social game and interaction with other participants. Fogg explains
that when people perceive social presence, they naturally respond in social ways and have feelings
like empathy or anger, or following social rules such as taking turns (Fogg, 2002).
2. Persuasive Technology And The Fogg Behavioral Model
The limitations of e-learning from a pedagogical point of view are the fact that it cannot transmit
emotion or engage the student as a teacher could. For this lack of feeling or emotional interaction,
an e-learning system must compensate and try and stimulate learners with other means.
324 University of Bucharest and "Babeş-Bolyai" University of Cluj-Napoca
JB Fogg studied the concept of persuasive technology (Fogg, 2002) and how we can design
systems that impact the user also on an affective level. He proposes a model Fogg's Behavior
Model (FBM) (Fogg, 2009) that studies the factors that can generate a certain behavior. This
model has a high applicability in the case of a human-computer interaction.
The model comprises 3 main elements: motivation, ability and triggers, which occurring at the
same time can determine a target behavior.
We further try to view how we can apply this model to an e-learning system and its users. As
mentioned before, in order to effectively go over course and learn, the student must be at the same
time motivated, capable and triggered in order to accomplish a desired action or a target behavior.
He must reach the behavior activation threshold in order to read, learn or solve. The desired state
for the student is referred to as flow, an optimal state which translates into concentration, when we
believe the students interacts most effectively and the actual learning takes place.
Motivation, at its core, can be caused by couples of opposites like pleasure/pain, hope/fear, and
social acceptance/rejection. If for example a student is able to solve a problem but has no
motivation to do it, he will not do so. Once his social reputation is at stake or he is conscious of the
fact that he might get a small grade, the motivation, either positive or negative will determine him
to solve the problem.
On the other hand ability is also a factor that influences the occurrence of a behavior. Even if a
person is highly motivated, a behavior cannot occur if he does not have the ability. On the other
hand a high motivation can determine a subject to find the means to accomplish a task, thus gain
the ability
Fogg also states that motivation and ability alone are not enough to determine a behavior. A
certain behavior needs a trigger, something to tell the user to complete the action in a certain
moment; it is also referred as a call to action. Triggers are connected to motivation. They can be a
spark – this tends to motivate a user, a facilitator – tends to offer ability to highly motivated users,
and lastly a signal – when users have both ability and motivation, but it functions as a reminder.
Examples of target behavior can be: donate money, buy a product or share with a friend.
Computers and the use of technology enable us to act instantly to triggers. A future trend is
moving technology towards mobile and thus e-learning can become m-learning, and courses can
also be context aware and supporting multiple formats (Morar, 2010). Because of the size
limitations of mobile phones we must adapt the structure of courses and evaluation to fit to these
smaller environments, but nevertheless achieve the desired goal.
3. Games In Real Life And In E-Learning
Games are part of everyday life. Americans spent over $25 billion on video games in 2010. Their
main goal is entertainment, but their universal applicability gave games extra functions in various
aspects of everyday life. Games are used not only for leisure but also by industries like defence,
education, scientific exploration, health care, emergency management, city planning, engineering,
religion, and politics. They are also called serious games and their main purpose is to train,
investigate, or advertise.
Serious games are complete games with serious intentions and designed accordingly whereas
in gamified application only certain elements from games are used.
Learning through games is not a novel approach. Elisabeth Corcoran (Corcoran, 2010) claims
that there are at least 3 types of games used in education: the classic edu-tech games, games
developed by students themselves like Scratch and the last approach gamified courses, meaning
adding game mechanics to various applications, tasks, etc. Whether offline or online, games have
helped scholars reach their educational goals in a more engaging way. Nevertheless we must note
the difference between the so called “educational games (serious games, simulators)” and the
gamification of e-learning. While the first employs a bigger quantity of resources, game design
knowledge and graphics, the second one does not engage as many resources or a special design.
The 6th International Conference on Virtual Learning ICVL 2011 325
4. The Gamification Of Education
There is little research however regarding the usefulness of gamification in education. In (Lee and
Hammer, 2011) the authors start by explaining the meaning of gamification, what it is and how it
can be used, while also pointing out the possible disadvantages in case of misuse. They define it as
the use of game mechanics, dynamics and frameworks to promote desired behaviors. Returning
also to the point made by Fogg we can use gamification to determine certain behaviors or correct
others and we can thus see the utility of using gamification in learning, and even more in elearning.
There might be possible dangers if the gamification design does not suit the purpose of
motivating students to engage and offer support to teachers and on the contrary for example it
might teach students that they should learn only when provided by an extrinsic motivation.
Authors of (Kapp, 2011) notice a large increase in the gamification of learning and instruction.
Due to the user of game elements like time, accuracy, point systems integrated intro all types of
training programs encourage users to achieve their desired goals.
5. Gamification
Gamification is the use of game play elements for non-game applications, particularly consumeroriented
web and mobile sites, in order to encourage people to adopt the applications. It also
strives to encourage users to engage in desired behaviors in connection with the applications
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamification).This definition is related to similar pre-existing
concepts such as serious games, serious gaming, playful interaction, and game-based technologies
(Deterding et al, 2011).
Mundane activities especially for a longer period of time are not appealing but by combining
these activities with simple games we can create a more effective way to motivate people (Chrons
and Sundekk, 2011). Turning useful activities into games is called gamification and it has found its
way into many uses such as education.
Gamification is a quite recent concept, on the market as well as in research, but it has a big
potential. It has been added to the Gartner Hype Cycle for 2011. Gartner Group predicts
gamification will be a key trend that every CIO, IT planner and enterprise architect must be aware
of as it relates to business (Gartner Group, 2011).
Figure 30. Gartner Hype Cycle for 2011
326 University of Bucharest and "Babeş-Bolyai" University of Cluj-Napoca
Gamification is recently successfully in websites in order to create loyalty, brand awareness
and effective marketing engagement (Foursquare, Stack Overflow) (Daniels, 2010), but according
to our observations it can successfully be used also in the educational environment.
There are several successful gamification examples like ZeroEmission from Nissan used for its
ecological model Nissan Leaf. Kobo Reading Life is an application that tries to gamify reading,
Nike ID is an e-commerce gamified application allowing users to design they own shoes and the
most popular designs gather points. Various application of gamification can be found in the
industry of health and wellness: Keas, FitBit, Lose It. Motivation and learning also offer examples
like: Stick.com, MindSnacks, and EnglishAttack.
Gamification desires to combine intrinsic motivation with extrinsic one in order to raise
motivation and engagement. Intrinsic motivations come from within, the user/actor decides
whether to make an action or not, some examples are: altruism, competition, cooperation, sense of
belonging, love or aggression. Extrinsic motivations, on the other hand, occur when something or
someone determines the user to make an action for example: classifications, levels, points, badges,
awards, missions (Viola, 2011).
In Figure 2. we can see which intrinsic motivation can be generated through existing game
mechanics.
Figure 31. The relation between game mechanics and aesthetics [Bunchball.com]
When trying to gamify an application there are some key components that need to be taken into
consideration and that build up a coherent overview of the entire functionality (utility) of an
application/website. Game mechanics and features are comprised in the game design in order to
create gameplay (http://gamification.org). Game mechanics are a set of rules and feedback loops
that create the gameplay. They represent the fundamentals of any gamified context. Each game
mechanic is characterized by three attributes:
• Game mechanics type: Progression, Feedback, Behavioral
• Benefits: engagement, loyalty, time spent, influence, fun, SEO, UGC, Virality
• Personality types: explorers, achievers, socializers and killers.
6. How to gamify an e-learning application?
In the following section we try to exemplify how gamification can be applied in the context of an
e-learning course. E-learning courses are usually linear courses. This kind of content structure can
allow us to easily gamify the content. The basic idea is to uncover content progressively, put more 
The 6th International Conference on Virtual Learning ICVL 2011 327
focus on exercises while offering the theoretical means for them to be solved and offer points for
correctly solving them.
When designing the gamification of the course we try to answer the following questions: why
do we gamify a service, what are the goals and what are the benefits expected. It is important to
take into consideration the subject we are addressing. In game psychology there can be identified
several personality types. These types are: achievers, explorers, socializers and killers (Bartle,
2004).
We will start on discussing an e-course example studied by Bamber (Henrich and Morgenroth,
2007), a course in information retrieval. We do not have access to the contents of such a course but
by studying the example we try to come with some propositions for system improvement.
The purpose of any e-course application is to share knowledge to the users and in most cases
offer means of evaluation and feedback. The main goal is to motivate students to learn the
available information as best as possible in order for them to perform well during evaluation and
advance through the course with success.
By using this application we wish to motivate users to study, rise engagement of students with
the systems. By spending more time with the system we expect that the users get better results,
advance through the course faster and perform better on final tests.
In (Henrich and Morgenroth, 2007), the authors present an Information Retrieval e-learning
course divided into two different modules IR1 and IR2 that have been used for five years for
students enrolled in distance learning and which present different characteristics. The didactic
concept is presenting the course content two 4 different types of users:
• Presence learning supported by e-learning materials
• Distance learning with physical on-site presence for discussion
• Distance learning with supervision
• Distance learning without supervision
The informative material varies from the first category to the last one. The information
presented regardless of each form should be complete, but the fact that for example the first group
can benefit from constant supervision and assistance the e-learning system should compensate this
for the last group and create support mechanisms for students with questions. The first group
benefits from teaching and exercises during the course but also from materials provided by the elearning
application like scripts, self assigned tests and mid-terms. While the first two groups have
contact with the teacher on a regular basis, the last two use forums, emails or chat.
In addition to the information already included in the course we propose the following
gamification elements:
• Any student needs an account where they can edit their personal profile, in game
mechanics known as avatar and customize it according to their preferences. They select
preferences and courses followed and passed, thus focusing on positive the positive
results). They can belong to groups and have access to an activity feed where
notifications, news and updates are received.
• The course is divided into main chapters or sections. By applying the cascading
information principle, we divide the course into smallest bits of coherent content. The
content should be synthetic, but should offer link to more detailed information (links,
graphics etc.). Each piece of content should be followed by exercises and an evaluation
step. By doing the exercises at the end of each section the student accumulates points. At
the end of each chapter the student advances a level, this being a valuable achievement.
This has a direct effect on his status. A relative positioning between his peer can be
presented in a leaderboard but also top scores.
328 University of Bucharest and "Babeş-Bolyai" University of Cluj-Napoca
• They must be constantly offered feedback and be informed of their progression within the
course, for this it is important to use progression bars.
• Offer the ability to create periodical physical or virtual appointments or curfews and
deadlines in order to motivate them to return periodically to the application.
• The system should be made as social as possible (Farzan and Brusilovsky, 2005) in order
to simulate the familiar environment of a classroom and a classroom community. This is
important for achievers that need recognition from peer but also to motivate students
through peer pressure or comparison with other students.
• For accomplishing difficult tasks or exercises the students receive special bonuses.
• The system should compensate students not only for their academic achievements but
also for proper behavior and social engagement like helping peers, commenting, and
adding value to the application etc. by offering badges.
• Offer the possibility to convert points or badges into virtual goods or even get discounts
for the tuition fees. Students will engage more with the application and will be motivated
to earn more points in order to benefit from these advantages.
• While advancing within the course the student should be informed of the next step so as
to know what to expect. Anticipation is a strong motivator which can get users excited
and engage for a longer period of time and maintain the flow of learning.
7. Conclusions
Gamification does not imply creating a game. It means makes education more fun and engaging,
without undermining its credibility. Gamification helps students gain motivation towards studying,
and because of the positive feedback they get pushed forwards and become more interested and
stimulated to learn. Gamification can constitute a powerful boost to determine them to study/read
more.
According to (http://gamification.org/wiki/Encyclopedia) engagement is the important metric
for success in gamification. There are several metrics to analyze engagement which due to
technological advancement in analytics can be included into such a web application. These metrics
are: page views per visitor, time spent on site, total time per user, frequency of visit, participation
and conversions.
In our future work we wish to implement the gamification elements proposed on an e-learning
course and follow the above mentioned metrics. It is however intuitive that gamification can
improve motivation and engagement of users with such a system.
By gamifying an e-course we do not wish to replace the intrinsic motivation of student, which
is stinger and more long term, with the extrinsic one, but offer a combination of the two for a
better performance. Gamification offers the proper tools to generate positive change in behavior
as according to Fogg. We can use this mean to create more effective and engaging e-learning
applications