Removing Gamification from an Enterprise SNS
Jennifer Thom, David R. Millen, Joan DiMicco
IBM T J Watson Research
1 Rogers Street
Cambridge, MA 02142
{jthomsa, david_r_millen,joan.dimicco}@us.ibm.com
ABSTRACT
Gamification, the use of game mechanics in non-gaming
applications, has been applied to various systems to
encourage desired user behaviors. In this paper, we examine
patterns of user activity in an enterprise social network
service after the removal of a points-based incentive
system. Our results reveal that the removal of the incentive
scheme did reduce overall participation via contribution
within the SNS. We also describe the strategies by point
leaders and observe that users geographically distant from
headquarters tended to comment on profiles outside of their
home country. Finally, we describe the implications of the
removal of extrinsic rewards, such as points and badges, on
social software systems, particularly those deployed within
an enterprise.
Author Keywords
Gamification, organizational social networking
ACM Classification Keywords
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.
INTRODUCTION
Designers of social software systems have employed
aspects of gamification – the integration of game-inspired
elements – to incent repeat usage, increase contributions,
and establish user reputations. These incentives can come in
the form of points, badges and leveling that can help the
player advance in status. In the workplace, game-like
systems have been employed to collect information about
employees [6] and incent contribution within enterprise
social software [5]. Ultimately, gamification aims to create
a sense of playfulness in non-game environments so that
participation becomes enjoyable and desirable.
Game mechanics draw heavily from theories of social
psychology that predict how users can be motivated to
participate in collective systems for individual benefit [1].
For instance, badges and points can be categorized as
extrinsic rewards for participation (e.g. posting a comment,
checking into a location). There is, however, evidence that
extrinsic rewards can undermine intrinsic motivation to
complete a task, particularly if the task is interesting and
beneficial to the user [2]. This suggests if members of a
community find participation in a social site enjoyable, the
addition of specific reward structures (e.g. levels, badges)
may actually decrease already existing intrinsic motivation
to contribute.
In this paper, we focus on the implications of the wholesale
removal of such features from an enterprise social
networking service and answer the following main research
question:
How does the removal of gamification features affect user
activity within an enterprise social networking service?
Our data suggests that the removal of such features does
negatively impact continued participation in the SNS, and
that the removal of the extrinsic rewards also decreased the
activity by geographically distant users, despite factors that
might increase their motivation to maintain activity. We
make a secondary observation that there were geographic
differences in how users employed commenting strategies
within the system, where those outside of the United States
tended to reach out to those outside their home locations.
METHOD
The current study focuses on a points-based system on an
enterprise SNS deployed within a large IT enterprise
headquartered in the northeastern United States with a
globally distributed workforce of approximately 400K
employees. The goal of the incentive scheme was to
encourage content contribution, so points were awarded for
the addition of lists, photos and comments. Each user
received 5 points for each contributed photo or list, while
comments on a profile page, photo and list received 15
points.
Log analysis had revealed that comments helped to draw
visitors back to the SNS, so this particular scheme rewarded
commenting behavior [5]. The incentive design also
included a leveling component, with 4 tiers of status
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior
specific permission and/or a fee.
CSCW 2012, February 11–15, 2012, Seattle, Washington.
Copyright 2011 ACM XXX-X-XXXXX-XXX-X/XX/XX...$5.00.
Citation: Thom, J., Millen, D.R. and DiMicco, J. (to appear). Removing Gamification from an Enterprise SNS. Proc.CSCW2012.
depending on accumulated points (Figure 1) and the
appropriate badges displayed on user profile pages. Those
who received the most points were spotlighted on a leader
board, accessible from the user’s login page (Figure 1).
To measure the impact of the points deployment on the
social system, an experiment was run for six months in
which half of the site was able to earn points and the other
half of the site was unaware of the existence of the points
system. In an analysis of the first three weeks of the
experiment, the incentive scheme dramatically increased
the overall levels of content contributed upon introduction,
followed by a decayed impact [5]. Over the entire six
months, usage analysis revealed that as new users joined the
site, those who could earn points added more content over
time, both short and long-term, yet the proportion of new
users who contributed content was the same between the
points-earning and non-points-earning users [3]. After the
six-month deployment, the points deployment became
available to all members of the SNS.
The current study focuses on a specific event that has
heretofore not been reported in prior research – the
complete removal of the points system from the site 10
months after their introduction as an experimental feature.
Points removal entailed the deleting of all interface features
related to the incentive, such as the profile badges,
leaderboards and display of point totals to users. Site
administrators announced the removal of the points system
via the user forums found on the employee intranet. The
data in the current study consists of four weeks of usage
logs from two weeks before and after points were removed
from the site. We limited the users of the study to those that
had used the system at least once during that time period.
RESULTS
Our analysis focuses on 3486 members of the site that had
contributed at least one item of content during the fourweek
analysis period. Table 1 presents the total number of
contributions by each of the content types before and after
the removal of the points system for these members.
Because the distribution of contributions is non-normal, we
conducted all analysis on log-transformed data; however,
we report all results as non-transformed for readability. A
repeated measures GLM (points deployed/no points)
reveals that the removal of the points significantly
decreased contributions of photos (df=1,1717, F=38.24,
p<0.001) and lists (df=1, 1211, F=39.07, p<0.001). The
analysis also reveals a main effect of the removal of points
over all types of comments (df=1,710 F=49.50, p<0.001;
df=1,885, F=308.78, p<0.001; df=1,1627, F=603.95,
p<0.001 for lists, photos and profiles respectively).
We conducted a qualitative analysis of the comments left
by the point leaders reveals that types of comments
contributed by the most active users during this time period
differed in content and formality. One type of comment
observed was extremely concise and greeting-oriented,
placed on a profile page.
“HI”
Figure 1. Member status display (top), leaderboard showing point totals and count of content contributions (bottom).
Points Deployed
Total (#/user)
Points Removed
Total (#/user)
Photos 4502 (2.6) 2926 (1.7)
Lists 1277 (1.0) 780 (.64)
Profile comment 8983 (5.5) 4056 (2.5)
Photo comment 2598 (2.9) 1348 (1.5)
List comment 1770 (2.5) 873 (1.2)
Table 1. Contribution of content type during points
deployment (2 weeks) and after points removal (2 weeks).
Citation: Thom, J., Millen, D.R. and DiMicco, J. (to appear). Removing Gamification from an Enterprise SNS. Proc.CSCW2012.
"Hiee..."
"howz work goin on..?"
"Nice.."
Another type of comment left by the points leaders were
placed on the associated and generally focused on the target
content of interest.
"Love the pics. Have some ideas on articles for you, but
might want to give you the lowdown first. Up for a chat
sometime?"
"Connect back to me and then you can see some great
pictures I know you'll enjoy!"
After the removal of the points systems, we observed that
the prevalence of terse greeting-oriented comments
subsided. One possible explanation can be linked to the
design of the site. In this case, adding comments to a profile
page takes one click from the homepage, while adding
comments to a content type (e.g. photo or list) takes at least
two clicks.
Finally, we investigate in more detail whether the pointsbased
incentive system had a differential effect on globally
distributed employees. Based on prior research that
suggested that motivations for SNS usage differ between
employees who are geographically central and those who
are geographically distant from headquarters [9,10], we
analyzed points activity of the 1815 members from the
United States and the 287 members from India, the two
most active geographies in the study sample (Table 2).
Repeated measures GLM (points/no points) and country
(India/USA) as a between subjects variable reveals a main
effect of the removal of points over all types of comments
for both countries (df=1,478 F=15.822, p<0.001; df=1,596,
F=27.62, p<0.001; df=1,733, F=51.93, p<0.001 for lists,
photos and profiles respectively).
The analysis also revealed a main effect of country for
profile comments (df=1,733, F=444.88, p<0.001), with
users from India contributing more profile comments than
those from the United States. While the total (raw) numbers
for India is generally below those of the US, the
contribution levels are quite similar when normalized by
number of active contributors for that content type. The
noteworthy exception is the number of profile comments
contributed by employees from India. The total number of
profile comments is larger than those from US employees
in total (3543 vs 3502) and considerably higher per active
contributor (20.7 in India versus 4.1 in the US).
To further characterize differences in commenting patterns,
we recoded comments to indicate whether or not users in
each geography left comments on member content or
profiles in different countries and same country. Figure 2
describes the directionality of comments between and
within countries, normalized by posts/total number of
members inside and outside the country (e.g. for users from
India, the number of members inside and outside India).
These results suggest that users in the United States tended
to comment on content contributed by users in the same
country, while users in India tended to comment on content
created by those outside the country. Closer investigation of
the points leaders from India reveals that their
organizational affiliation is from the Services division,
which is one that provides operational and technical support
for internal and external clients. This finding is consistent
with prior research detailing the proportion of friend
connections between and within countries for India and the
US [9] and lends additional support to previous
observations regarding differing motivations for SNS usage
across factors such as geographical distance and
organizational function within an enterprise.
DISCUSSION
The main contribution of this study is the observation of the
impact of the removal of a gamification feature within a
social networking system. The removal of the points system
made a significant negative impact on the user activity of
the site, and our analysis suggests that contribution of
content significantly decreased after the deactivation of the
points system. This suggests that such extrinsic rewards did
influence a segment of the user population to participate
more intensely while the point system was in place.
Figure 2. Comments within and between countries before and
after the removal of points.
USA
Total (#/user)
India
Total (#/user)
Photos 4090 (4.1) 550 (5.6)
Lists 1159 (1.7) 104 (1.5)
Profile comment 3502 (4.1) 3543 (20.7)
Photo comment 2430 (1.3) 189 (5.6)
List comment 1584 (3.6) 102 (2.6)
Table 2. Contribution of content type by country over all
four weeks.
Citation: Thom, J., Millen, D.R. and DiMicco, J. (to appear). Removing Gamification from an Enterprise SNS. Proc.CSCW2012.
We also observed that the removal of the gamification
feature decreased activity by users in the two most active
geographies, the United States and India. However,
compared to users in the United States, users in India
commented more often on profiles outside of their home
country. This is consistent with research that suggests that
geographically distant members of an enterprise, far from
headquarters, have been observed to use social software
systems as a way to learn about its organizational culture
and build one’s reputation [7]. Again, however, there was a
negative effect of the removal of the extrinsic rewards
system, suggesting that intrinsic motivation to participate
may not be consistent across individuals.
We suggest two main implications for the design of
gamification systems that result from our findings. First, the
complete discontinuation of a game-like capability should
not be taken lightly, as they do seem to motivate
participation within a social system even for a short period
of time. If the particular game functionality seems stale and
in need of a redesign, one approach would be to have an
immediate transition to another game-like system to incent
new players or those who do participate primarily for
extrinsic rewards. In the case of this particular system, the
designers implemented a new feature to encourage
viewership of a more diverse set of content [4].
Second, we observed differences in the way users reacted to
the incentive system and that there were different strategies
adopted by the points leaders. However, other members of
the SNS may perceive unsolicited profile comments as
disruptive. One possible intervention would be a clearer
delineation of the rules of engagement and fair play. This
could be stated in policy by the site administrators or
through moderation within the system. Another approach
would be an incentive that increased common ground, as a
way to encourage collaboration or shared identity as way to
possibly reduce disruptive gaming from participants who
follow a different set of game values.
While we did not specifically study the cultural
consequences of this specific form of gamification, we
propose that game-like incentives can embody certain
values, such as competitiveness, which may not be
consistent with the culture of the organization [8]. In this
case, employees may not feel comfortable participating in a
system, which encourages such behavior. On the other
hand, members of organizational cultures that value public
competition may be extremely motivated by features, such
as leaderboards. Further, local culture may play a role in
the design of such systems. For instance, a point-based
currency on a Chinese online community reproduced norms
of social exchange and sharing within that culture, such as
guanxi and renping [11]. As a result, gamification features
in such cultures would require incentives that included
ideals of reciprocity, social obligation and face-saving.
LIMITATIONS
This study was conducted within a single global
organization and so was necessarily influenced by the
culture of that organization. Our results should be
interpreted in that light. Future work in other organizations
and settings is needed to better determine the
generalizability of our findings. Given the high levels of
interest in gamification and enterprise social computing, we
think that this research will serve as a useful foundation for
future work in this area. 